#Creating a new project Visual Studio represents your programs as projects. Project can be made up of many files, all working together. Sometimes it makes sense to group similar programs together - Visual Studio does that using Solutions. Solution is essentially a container with many projects. Good analogy to think about it is a folder that contains files (or other folders). Let's get started and create our first solution.##Creating a new solution In order to create a new solution go to File > New > Project… It will open New Project wizard. From the left-hand side menu select Templates > Other Project Types > Visual Studio Solutions and select a Blank Solution. It will create an empty solution for you. You can choose location where you want it to be created and give it a name. ##Adding a new project Once we’ve got a solution we can add a project to it. On the right-hand side you can see Solution Explorer window. Right-click on your solution icon and from the drop-down list select Add > New Project… It will open the same wizard as before. This time navigate to Installed > Visual F# > Windows and select Library##How project is organized?Visual Studio has added your new project under Solution. By default the library project contains:* References - list of references to other projects. It’s just how Visual Studio allows you to easily add dependencies to your project - all those information are stored in *.fsproj file.* AssemblyInfo.fs - this file provides a description of your library - its title, version, etc. * Library1.s - file where you can write your code* Script.fsx - script where you can quickly prototype your code (we will use it a lot as it’s very convenient)Next: [Structure of programs](14_structure_of_programs.md)